Our research group has developed a new MRI technique that produces remarkably precise and quantitative measurements of human brain tissue in vivo (Mezer et al., 2012; Mezer et al., under review). The method will have significant scientific and clinical applications for understanding human cognition and neurological disease. This application seeks support (a) to transform the scientific implementation to a format that is appropriate for distribution to colleagues in the clinic, and (b) to acquire data on normal control subjects that will enable the transition of the method into clinical applications.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a critical tool for the clinical assessment of brain disease. A non‐ invasive method that does not use ionizing radiation, MRI enables the scientist and clinician to visualize the human brain without harming the subject. Yet, there is an important limitation of most MRI methods that is not widely appreciated: In most clinical applications of MRI, diagnoses are based on a qualitative assessment of image appearance. The qualitative nature of the MRI data significantly limits their utility; without units, scientists and clinicians cannot rigorously compare images obtained at different MR sites or even from the same individual at different points in time. Just as we have units to record a child’s height or a patient’s temperature, we need quantitative MR measures to assess brain development or the effect of a drug on neural tissue.

The method we have developed estimates both the tissue (macromolecules and lipid membrane) volume and the rate of interaction between water molecules and the tissue surface. These fundamental brain tissue biomarkers are measured at high resolution, within each brain voxel (roughly 1 mm3). These measurements are quantitative and thus can be meaningfully compared across sites and within a single individual across time. The MR scans are efficient, and the calculations are simple and fast enough to be used in any clinical MR center. Stanford recently applied for a patent on the method {Mezer, 2012 #6178}; preliminary results are summarized in an article that is now under review {Mezer, under review #6177}.

The quantification of tissue volume and tissue‐water interaction rates will have significant value for scientists seeking to monitor healthy brain development across the lifespan as well as for clinicians characterizing and monitoring brain pathologies (Tofts, 2003 ). For example, we are applying the method in our research lab to understanding tissue development in pathways essential for learning to read; and we are collaborating with colleagues in the Medical School on applying the method to multiple sclerosis (MS).

Based on our current experience in these collaborations, it is clear that to extend the application we must implement the methods in a simplified software format that can be shared across multiple Stanford MRI sites. This work will speed the adoption of the method into clinical contexts. Furthermore, there is a need to acquire control data that can be shared so that this burden is lifted from the individual clinical investigators – who each need appropriate control measurements for comparison with their patients. The support we request is designed to speed the transition of these scientific tools into clinical application to improve patient evaluation and better treatments to patient in the very near future.

